# Data Sets and Forms

This chapter discusses data sets and forms, what types of forms are
available and describes best practises for the process of moving from
paper based to electronic forms.

## What is a data set?

All data entry in DHIS2 is organised through the use of data sets. A
data set is a collection of data elements grouped together for data
collection, and in the case of distributed installs they also define
chunks of data for export and import between instances of DHIS2 (e.g.
from a district office local installation to a national server). Data
sets are not linked directly to the data values, only through their data
elements and frequencies, and as such a data set can be modified,
deleted or added at any point in time without affecting the raw data
already captured in the system, but such changes will of course affect
how new data will be collected.

A data set has a period type which controls the data collection
frequency, which can be daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, six-monthly,
or yearly. Both the data elements to include in the data set and the
period type is defined by the user, together with a name, short name,
and code. If calculated fields are needed in the collection form (and
not only in the reports), then indicators can be assigned to the data
set as well, but these can only be used in custom forms (see further
down).

In order to use a data set to collect data for a specific organisation
unit the user must assign the organisation unit to the data set. This
mechanism controls which organisation units can use which data sets, and
at the same time defines the target values for data completeness (e.g.
how many health facilities in a district are expected to submit the RCH
data set every month).

A data element can belong to multiple data sets, but this requires
careful thinking as it may lead to overlapping and inconstant data being
collected if e.g. the data sets are given different frequencies and are
used by the same organisation units.

## What is a data entry form?

Once you have assigned a data set to an organisation unit that data set
will be made available in Data Entry (under Services) for the
organisation units you have assigned it to and for the valid periods
according to the data set's period type. A default data entry form will
then be shown, which is simply a list of the data elements belonging to
the data set together with a column for inputting the values. If your
data set contains data elements with categories such as age groups or
gender, then additional columns will be automatically generated in the
default form based on the categories. In addition to the default
list-based data entry form there are two more alternatives, the
section-based form and the custom form.

### Types of data entry forms

DHIS2 currently features three differnet types of forms which are
described in the following.

#### Default forms

A default data entry form is simply a list of the data elements
belonging to the data set together with a column for inputting the
values. If your data set contains data elements with a non-default
category combination, such as age groups or gender then additional
columns will be automatically generated in the default form based on the
different options/dimensions. If you use more than one category
combination in a data set you will get one table per category
combination in the default form, with different column headings for the
options.

#### Section forms

Section forms allow for a bit more flexibility when it comes to using
tabular forms and are quick and simple to design. Often your data entry
form will need multiple tables with subheadings, and sometimes you need
to disable (grey out) a few fields in the table (e.g. some categories do
not apply to all data elements), both of these functions are supported
in section forms. After defining a data set you can define it's sections
with subsets of data elements, a heading and possible grey fields in the
section's table. The order of sections in a data set can also be
defined. In Data Entry you can now start using the Section form (which
should appear automatically when sections are available for the selected
data set). Most tabular data entry forms should be possible to do with
sections forms. Utilizing the section or default forms makes life easy
as there is no need to maintain a fixed form design which includes
references to data elements. If these two types of forms are not meeting
your requirements then the third option is the completely flexible,
although more time-consuming, custom data entry forms.

#### Custom Forms

When the form you want to design is too complicated for the default or
section forms then your last option is to use a custom form. This takes
more time, but gives you full flexibility in terms of the design. In
DHIS2 there is a built in HTML editor (CK Editor) in the form designer
which allows you to either design the form in the GUI or paste in your
html directly (using the "source" window in the editor). In the custom
form you can insert static text or data fields (linked to data elements
+ category option combination) in any position on the form and you have
complete freedom to design the layout of the form. Once a custom form
has been added to a data set it will be available in Data Entry and used
automatically.

When using a custom form it is possible to use calculated fields to
display e.g. running totals or other calculations based on the data
captured in the form. This can e.g. be useful when dealing with stock or
logistics forms that need item balance, items needed for next period
etc. In order to do so, the user must first define the calculated
expressions as indicators and then assign these indicators to the data
set in question. In the custom form designer the user can then assign
indicators to the form the same way data elements are assigned. The
limitation to the calculated expression is that all the data elements
used in the expression must be available in the same data set since the
calculations are done on the fly inside the form, and are not based on
data values already stored in the database.

## From paper to electronic form - Lessons learned

When introducing an electronic health information system the system
being replaced is often paper based reporting. The process of migrating
to electronic data capture and analysis has some challenges. The
following sections suggest best practises on how to overcome these.

### Identify self-contained data elements

Typically the design of a DHIS2 data set is based on some requirements
from a paper form that is already in use. The logic of paper forms are
not the same as the data element and data set model of DHIS, e.g. often
a field in a tabular paper form is described both by column headings and
text on each row, and sometimes also with some introductory table
heading that provides more context. In the database this is captured for
one atomic data element with no reference to a position in a visual
table format so it is important to make sure the data element, with the
optional data element categories, captures the full meaning of each
individual field in the paper
form.

### Leave calculations and repetitions to the computer - capture raw data only

Another important thing to have in mind while designing data sets is
that the data set and the corresponding data entry form (which is a data
set with layout) is a data collection tool and not a report or analysis
tool. There are other far more sophisticated tools for data output and
reporting in DHIS2 than the data entry forms. Paper forms are often
designed with both data collection and reporting in mind and therefore
you might see things such as cumulative values (in addition to the
monthly values), repetition of annual data (the same population data
reported every month) or even indicator values such as coverage rates in
the same form as the monthly raw data. When you store the raw data in
the DHIS2 database every month and have all the processing power you
need within the computerised tool, there is no need (in fact it would be
wrong and most likely cause inconsistency) to register manually
calculated values such as the ones mentioned above. You only want to
capture the raw data in your data sets/forms and leave the calculations
to the computer, and presentation of such values to the reporting tools
in DHIS. Through the functionality of data set reports all tabular
section forms will automatically get extra columns at the far right
providing subtotal and total values for each row (data element).

