# I18n

## Locales { #webapi_locales } 

DHIS2 supports translations both for the user interface and for database
content.

### UI locales

You can retrieve the available locales for the user interface through
the following resource with a GET request. XML and JSON resource
representations are supported.

    /api/33/locales/ui

### Database content locales

You can retrieve and create locales for the database content with GET and
POST requests through the following resource. XML and JSON resource
representations are supported.

    /api/33/locales/db

## Translations { #webapi_translations } 

DHIS2 allows for translations of database content. You can work with
translations through the Web API using the *translations* resource.

    /api/33/translations

### Create a translation

You can create a translation with a POST request in JSON format:

```json
{
  "objectId": "P3jJH5Tu5VC",
  "className": "DataElement",
  "locale": "es",
  "property": "name",
  "value": "Casos de fiebre amarilla"
}
```

    POST /api/33/translations

The properties which support translations are listed in the table below.

<table>
<caption>Property names</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Property name</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>name</td>
<td>Object name</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>shortName</td>
<td>Object short name</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>description</td>
<td>Object description</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The classes which support translations are listed in the table below.

<table>
<caption>Class names</caption>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 34%" />
<col style="width: 65%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Class name</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>DataElementCategoryOption</td>
<td>Category option</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>DataElementCategory</td>
<td>Category</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>DataElementCategoryCombo</td>
<td>Category combination</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>DataElement</td>
<td>Data element</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>DataElementGroup</td>
<td>Data element group</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>DataElementGroupSet</td>
<td>Data element group set</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Indicator</td>
<td>Indicator</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>IndicatorType</td>
<td>Indicator type</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>IndicatorGroup</td>
<td>Indicator group</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>IndicatorGroupSet</td>
<td>Indicator group set</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>OrganisationUnit</td>
<td>Organisation unit</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>OrganisationUnitGroup</td>
<td>Organisation unit group</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>OrganisationUnitGroupSet</td>
<td>Organisation unit group set</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>DataSet</td>
<td>Data set</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Section</td>
<td>Data set section</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>ValidationRule</td>
<td>Validation rule</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>ValidationRuleGroup</td>
<td>Validation rule group</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Program</td>
<td>Program</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>ProgramStage</td>
<td>Program stage</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>TrackedEntityAttribute</td>
<td>Tracked entity attribute</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>TrackedEntity</td>
<td>Tracked entity</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>RelationshipType</td>
<td>Relationship type for tracked entity instances</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>OptionSet</td>
<td>Option set</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Attribute</td>
<td>Attribute for metadata</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Get translations

You can browse all translations through the translations resource:

    GET /api/33/translations

You can use the standard filtering technique to fetch translations of
interest. E.g. to get all translations for data elements in the Spanish
locale you can use this request:

    /api/33/translations.json?fields=*&filter=className:eq:DataElement&filter=locale:eq:es

To get translations for a specific object for all properties:

    /api/33/translations.json?fields=*&filter=className:eq:DataElement
      &filter=locale:eq:fr&filter=objectId:eq:fbfJHSPpUQD


## Internationalization { #webapi_i18n } 

In order to retrieve key-value pairs for translated strings you can use
the *i18n* resource.

    /api/33/i18n

The endpoint is located at */api/i18n* and the request format is a simple
array of the key-value pairs:

```json
[
  "access_denied",
  "uploading_data_notification"
]
```

The request must be of type *POST* and use *application/json* as
content-type. An example using curl, assuming the request data is saved
as a file `keys.json`:

```bash
curl -d @keys.json "play.dhis2.org/demo/api/33/i18n" -X POST
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" -u admin:district
```

The result will look like this:

```json
{
  "access_denied":"Access denied",
  "uploading_data_notification":"Uploading locally stored data to the server"
}
```


